=================
Pantry User Guide
=================

Pantry (PAN-TRanscriptome phenotYping) is a framework for generating molecular phenotypes from RNA-Seq. Existing tools have been developed to generate different transcriptomic phenotypes, and Pantry allows you to run them with full flexibility in a convenient and organized process. The goal is to make molecular QTL mapping and other analyses as easy to perform for a multitude of transcriptomic phenotypes as for basic gene expression only.

A project is specified with a config file containing general parameters, e.g. paths to FASTQ and reference annotation file, single-end or paired-end, and strandedness. It also lists the phenotypes to generate.

Installation
============

It is recommended to install Pantry by cloning or downloading the repository, since you will then need to copy the project template directory for your own analysis. Hold off on installing the Pantry Python package until the conda environment has been activated.

.. code-block:: shell

   git clone https://github.com/daniel-munro/Pantry.git


Code
====

The ``Project/`` directory is a template for a project. To run Pantry on a dataset, copy the contents of ``Project/`` to a new directory that you can write to. Your project directory now contains all the data processing code, so that if you modify it or add custom phenotypes, you have a record of it that stays with the results and is not automatically changed by package updates or other projects.

The commands and code to run the steps are given in `Snakemake <https://snakemake.github.io/>`_ files, located by default in ``Project/steps/``. This package includes sensible defaults for a set of tools, but you can edit the commands and add new phenotypes.

The goal of a project is to generate phenotype tables for a set of samples. Each tool could involve any combination of:

- Setup like indexing or annotation filtering
- Processing each sample's BAM file
- Intermediate steps requiring data from all samples, e.g. clustering
- Final assembly of all results into a phenotype table

Each file in ``steps/`` contains all of these steps for one phenotype. Snakemake looks at the inputs and outputs for each rule and figures out the order and number of times to run each one.

Config file
===========

The config file is a file in YAML format specifying general parameters, input files, and phenotypes to generate. The project template directory includes a config, which is for a small example dataset and a small subset of the human reference:

.. code-block:: yaml

  ## Raw RNA-Seq data
  paired_end: True
  read_length: 75
  # Input data can include FASTQ files, BAM files, or both
  # Point to FASTQ files if they exist, otherwise comment out or remove these, and FASTQ files will be generated from BAM files:
  fastq_dir: input/fastq
  fastq_map: input/fastq_map.txt
  # Point to BAM files if they exist, otherwise comment out or remove these, and BAM files will be generated from FASTQ files:
  bam_dir: input/bam
  bam_map: input/bam_map.txt
  ...

Input files
===========

Some phenotypes are extracted from unmapped reads (e.g. using kallisto), while others are extracted from mapped reads. Your input data to the Pantry pipeline can be FASTQ files or BAM files, or both:

- **If you have only FASTQ files**, then BAM files will be generated by mapping reads. The default pipeline removes sequence and sequence quality info from the generated BAM files so they take up ~90% less space.
- **If you only have BAM files**, then FASTQ files will be generated by extracting reads from the BAM files. The BAM files must include sequence and sequence quality info to do this.
- **If you have both already**, then point to both in the config and they will be used as-is. The BAM files can include or exclude sequence and sequence quality info.

FASTQ sample map
----------------

A file containing FASTQ file paths and the name of the sample they map to, separated by tabs, with no header. The paths should be relative to the ``fastq_dir`` specified in the config file.

Example for single-end reads::

   batch1/sampleA_run1.fastq.gz	sampleA
   batch1/sampleA_run2.fastq.gz	sampleA
   batch2/sampleA_run3.fastq.gz	sampleA
   batch1/sampleB_run1.fastq.gz	sampleB
   ...

Example for paired-end reads::

   batch1/sampleA_run1_1.fastq.gz	batch1/sampleA_run1_2.fastq.gz	sampleA
   batch1/sampleA_run2_1.fastq.gz	batch1/sampleA_run2_2.fastq.gz	sampleA
   batch2/sampleA_run3_1.fastq.gz	batch2/sampleA_run3_2.fastq.gz	sampleA
   batch1/sampleB_run1_1.fastq.gz	batch1/sampleB_run1_2.fastq.gz	sampleB
   ...

FASTQ files
-----------

FASTQ files must be compressed (decompressible with ``zcat``) unless you modify the ``STAR`` command to handle uncompressed files. Multiple FASTQ files (or paired-end file pairs) can be provided for each sample and all reads will be used.

BAM sample map
----------------

A file containing BAM file paths and the name of the sample they map to, separated by tabs, with no header::

   batch1/sampleA.Aligned.sortedByCoord.out.bam	sampleA
   batch1/sampleB.Aligned.sortedByCoord.out.bam	sampleB
   ...

The BAM files should be sorted by genomic coordinate (e.g. the default STAR output) and should be mapped using the same annotations as will be used for phenotype extraction.

Reference genome and annotations
--------------------------------

- The FASTA file for a reference genome, e.g. ``Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa``.
- A GTF file containing the gene, exon, and other annotations, compatible with the supplied reference genome. For example, ``Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.106.gtf``.
- The cDNA sequences for the same set of annotations. For example, ``Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.cdna.all.fa.gz``.

Running from the command line
=============================

Phenotypes are usually computed by running one subprocess per phenotype category per sample. Within the specified output directory, one directory will be created for each phenotype category, containing intermediate (often per-sample) files from each program. These data will then be combined into one BED file per phenotype group so that QTL mapping can be run separately for each.

All this is done using Snakemake, so general guides to using Snakemake can be found online to learn its features. For example, you can specify a profile that determines how steps get run, and is different from the project config file described above. Here is an example profile config for use on a computing cluster with slurm scheduling:

``~/.config/snakemake/slurm/config.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   use-conda: true
   cluster: "sbatch -t {resources.walltime}:00:00 --mem={resources.mem_mb} -c {threads} {resources.partition} --mail-type=FAIL --mail-user=dmunro@scripps.edu"
   default-resources: [walltime=1, mem_mb=4000, partition=""]
   # partition should be e.g. "--partition=gpu"

Resources are specified within some of the snakemake rules, which are plugged into this command and automatically submitted as cluster jobs.

Output files
============

BED output files
----------------

The `BED <https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1>`_ files include four annotation columns, ``chr``, ``start``, ``end``, and ``phenotype_id``, followed by one column per sample containing the phenotype values. There may be one phenotype per gene (e.g. expression) or multiple (e.g. splicing), but in either case the coordinates indicate the transcription start site of the phenotype's gene. This ensures that the same cis-window variants are tested for all phenotypes of the same gene.

::

   #chr	start	end	phenotype_id	HG00315	HG00106	NA18489
   1	29569	29570	ENSG00000227232:1:17055:17233:clu_1_-	0.671533	0.654321	0.673716
   1	29569	29570	ENSG00000227232:1:17055:17606:clu_1_-	0.0340633	0.037037	0.0241692
   1	29569	29570	ENSG00000227232:1:17368:17606:clu_1_-	0.294404	0.308642	0.302115
   1	778668	778669	ENSG00000228327:1:729804:729898:clu_2_-	0.275362	0.203125	0.247748
   1	778668	778669	ENSG00000228327:1:729804:733307:clu_2_-	0.362319	0.265625	0.166667
   1	778668	778669	ENSG00000228327:1:729804:736713:clu_2_-	0	0.234375	0.0765766
   1	778668	778669	ENSG00000228327:1:733213:733307:clu_2_-	0	0	0.238739
   1	778668	778669	ENSG00000228327:1:736619:736713:clu_2_-	0.224638	0.296875	0.175676
   1	778668	778669	ENSG00000228327:1:736619:740129:clu_2_-	0.137681	0	0.0945946
   ...

Phenotype groups
----------------

For phenotypes categories in which multiple phenotypes are produced per gene (e.g., splice junctions), a file is produced that specifies which gene each phenotype belongs to. This is used by tensorQTL for grouped testing:

::

   ENSG00000227232:1:17055:17233:clu_4_-	ENSG00000227232
   ENSG00000227232:1:17055:17606:clu_4_-	ENSG00000227232
   ...
   ENSG00000227232:1:18379:24738:clu_5_-	ENSG00000227232
   ENSG00000279457:1:187577:187755:clu_6_-	ENSG00000279457
   ENSG00000279457:1:187577:188130:clu_6_-	ENSG00000279457
   ...

Running
=======

We suggest these steps to run Pantry.

1. Run the included test data
-----------------------------

This will require installation of all programs used in the snakefiles. `Miniconda <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`_ is recommended for easy installation and management of all these programs. A conda environment specification is provided in ``conda_env.yaml``:

.. code-block:: shell

   conda env create -n pantry --file conda_env.yaml
   conda activate pantry
   pip3 install -e Pantry

Once you think you have everything installed, try running on the included test data, which is small:

.. code-block:: shell

   cd Project
   snakemake -j1

2. Run with your data
---------------------

Snakemake has features to handle many execution needs such as threads, computational resources, and automatic cluster job submission.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Contents:


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
